

Richard Nakka's Experimental Rocketry Web Site

CD ROM of Nakka-Rocketry Website

￼
Due to popular demand, Volume 10 of my website is available for purchase on a CD. Over 800 copies of the Nakka-Rocketry CD have been sold around the world.
This CD allows the user fast and easy off-line viewing of my website. Convenient while working in "the field". Additionally, the CD provides a permanent record of the site. Note that Vol.10 retains the full contents of Volumes 1 through 9.
As a bonus, hundreds of hi-resolution photos are included, most of which are not posted on my website. Additionally, well over one hundred video clips are added to the CD, including some "archival" footage of my early rocketry experiments and static tests. As well, dozens of rocketry related articles and reports.
The Nakka-Rocketry CD comes with a glossy, full-colour label as illustrated. All files burned onto the CD have been scanned using the latest anti-virus software. Nearly 3 Gigabytes of data, in total! (Note: due to large volume of data, Vol.10 is burned onto a data DVD, rather than CD).
All the proceeds I receive from the CD sales will be used to offset the ever-escalating costs associated with maintaining and expanding my website. Any additional revenue will be pumped back into amateur rocketry research which will provide for future content of my website that will hopefully prove to be of benefit to AER enthusiasts around the world.

￼NEW -- Volume 10 of the Nakka-Rocketry CD is optionally available as a downloadable file. The file is ISO format (3.0 Gbyte) which is an archive file that contains an identical copy of the CD contents. Once downloaded, the CD files are extracted using a compression/decompresson software such as WinRAR. Merci beaucoup to Jérôme Bise for his continuing efforts to help me with all this.
￼New for Volume 10 - As a bonus, CD includes scans of my earliest rocketry experimental notebooks covering the period from 1972 through 1984. These are hi-resolution scans (totalling 277 Megbytes) of the first nine volumes of my notebooks that I diligently kept during this first epoch of my amateur rocketry experimentation. Click for sample pages from notebook (7 Meg PDF file)


Available version:     
Volume 10 (February 2020 creation date)


￼

INSTRUCTIONS for downloading, uncompressing and viewing the electronic (downloadable) version of Nakka-Rocketry CD.
Hardcopy CD's are usually sent out within two days of receiving an order. In order to keep cost to a minimum, CDs are sent via regular mail post.  PLEASE ALLOW UP TO 2 WEEKS FOR DELIVERY TO USA AND 5 WEEKS FOR INTERNATIONAL DESTINATIONS.

Return to Home Page

