
Richard Nakka's Experimental Rocketry Web Site


￼
KN - Fructose (KNFR) Propellant

Introduction
Properties of some Sugars
Propellant Formulation
Preparation and Mixing
Casting Fructose-based Propellant
Water Content & Hygroscopicity
Theoretical Performance
Propellant Burn Rate
Assessment

Introduction
This web page describes the KN-Fructose rocket propellant, referred to by the acronym KNFR. This propellant is formulated as a heat-fused mixture of potassium nitrate (KN), and Fructose. This propellant was developed in 2001 as an alterative to the other "sugar propellants" such as dextrose-based KNDX and sorbitol-based KNSB. Fructose, also known as "levulose" or "fruit sugar", is a monosaccharide. Pure, dry fructose is a sweet, white, odourless, crystalline solid, and is the most water-soluble of all the sugars.
￼
The Fructose molecule (left) is much smaller than the sucrose molecule, in fact, its molecular weight is nearly one half that of sucrose, and is the same as that of dextrose. The chemical formula for sucrose is C12H22O11, and for Fructose (and dextrose), it is C6H12O6. Smaller organic molecules often have a lower melting point (a sought after trait), and also have less tendency to decompose upon heating (also a sought after trait), which is a result of the molecule having less tendency to break up as it "thrashs around" due to thermal agitation.
As far as hygroscopicity is concerned, KNFR is quite hygroscopic, more so than either KNDX or KNSB, and similar to KNSU.

Properties of some Sugar compounds
The following is a comparison of some physical and thermodynamic properties of Sucrose, Dextrose, and Fructose sugars:
Table 1 -- Sugar properties

Sucrose
Dextrose
Fructose
Chemical Formula
C12H22O11
C6H12O6
C6H12O6
Molecular Weight (g/mole)
342.3
180.16
180.16
Melting Point (C.)
185 (d)
146 (d)
103
Density (g/cm3)
1.542
1.562
1.694
Enthalpy of Formation (kJ/mol)
-2221.2
-1274.5
-1265.6
Enthalpy of Formation (cal/gram)
-1549.9
-1689.7
-1677.9
Appearance
white granular or
cohesive powder
white granular or
cohesive powder
white granular crystals
 d = decomposition initiates upon melting
It is interesting to note that fructose has a 10% greater density than sucrose. This is beneficial for a rocket fuel, as it allows for greater density loading in a rocket motor (greater mass for a given volume).

Propellant Formulation
The standard formulation of KNFR propellant is 65% potassium nitrate (KN) which serves as the oxidizer and 35% Fructose (SB) which serves as the fuel and binder. This ratio of oxidizer to fuel mass represents a practical upper limit for "solids" loading of a sugar binder, while maintaining good performance and burn rate characteristics. A higher O/F ratio, and thus higher "solids" loading, may give slightly enhanced performance, but leads to a thicker consistency of the melted mixture (slurry). This makes casting more difficult. The effect of using a lower O/F ratio is reduced performance and a slower burning rate. However, the slurry has a thinner consistency, which makes casting a bit easier.
Potassium nitrate, also known as saltpetre, is a commonly used chemical (used, for example, for pickling meats, and in toothpaste for "sensitive teeth"). I’ve purchased potassium nitrate in 2 kg. lots at a veterinary chemical supply store. Potassium nitrate is also sold as 14-0-45 fertilizer at farm supply stores, typically 98-99% pure. This is by far the most economical form, and the performance is generally no different that purer grades. Sadly, nowadays the sale of potassium nitrate has had restrictions placed on it, making it more challenging for prospective rocket engineers to carry on their calling. Good fortune does shine on those who deserve it, however. It turns out that it is not difficult to synthesize potassium nitrate from a commonly available, non-regulated fertilizer (click for more information).
It is important to note that 9% of the mass of Fructose monohydrate is bound water. As such, the ratio of potassium nitrate to Fructose monohydrate must be adjusted to achieve a given oxidizer/fuel (O/F) ratio. In other words, the required amount of Fructose monohydrate required in the mixture must be multiplied by 1.1, which is the ratio of Molecular Weights (198.18/180.16). For example, if 100 grams of KNFR propellant of 65/35 O/F ratio is required, the quantity of Fructose monohydrate required is 0.35 * 100 * 1.1 = 38.5 grams. Instead of using Fructose monohydrate, it has been found to be more expedient to use the dessicated form: anhydrous Fructose. Dessicating serves to drives out the water, allowing the unaltered fraction of 35% Fructose to be used. Dessicating is readily done by spreading Fructose monohydrate onto a cooking sheet, to a maximum depth of 2 cm, then placing this into a preheated oven set at 80oC (175 oF.) for between 1 and 1.5 hours. Once cooled, the resulting caked lumps may be reduced to a fine powder by using a flour sifter or by rubbing inside a strainer.

Table 2 -- Propellant Density Comparisons

KNFR
KNDX
KNSU
KNSB
Density (gram/cc)
1.942
1.879
1.869
1.841
Density Percent
100.0%
103.4%
104.0%
105.5%

Preparation and Mixing

The first step in preparation of the propellant is to grind, or mill, the potassium nitrate to a fine texture. This may easily be done with the use of an electric coffee grinder, such as that shown in Figure 3. Adding two tablespoons (30ml) to the hopper, the grinder is then run about 15-30 seconds, depending on how finely the KN is to be milled. To facilitate milling, the grinder is slowly "gyrated" about its base. Milling as such will reduce the particle size appreciably. A sieve analysis that was done on three samples of milled KN prills indicated that 50% of the resulting particles are smaller than 74 microns, with most of the remainder being less than 234 microns in size.
It should be noted that the viscosity of the melted propellant slurry is highly dependant upon how finely of the potassium nitrate is milled. When prepared as described above, the slurry will not be fluid enough to cast, and as such it is necessary to scoop the propellant into the casting mould. The slurry will be more fluid and easier to cast if the potassium nitrate is milled for a shorter time, such as 10 seconds or less. Or if the potassium nitrate is obtained as a fine granular form (similar to table salt), it can be used "as is". The drawback is reduced performance due to less efficient combustion, lower chamber pressure, combined with a slightly longer burn time compared to propellant made with fine-grind oxidizer.

Following the milling process, the two constituents are carefully weighed out using an accurate scale. Enough of the powdered mixture of potassium nitrate and sorbitol has to be prepared to take into account the inevitable waste resulting from the casting procedure, typically 20-25% additional for small batches, less for larger batches.
After individually weighing out the two constituents, the two are blended together in a single container. Complete mixing of the two is necessary for optimum and consistent performance. I built an electric tumbler for this purpose (Figure 4). The powdered mixture is loaded into a tupperware container, then secured to the rotating drum with rubber bands, then tumbled for several hours. The tumbler rotates at 30 RPM. As a guideline, I allow one hour per hundred grams of powdered mixture. Videoclip of tumbler in action
Once the mixing operation has been completed, the powdered mixture is transferred immediately to a closed container for safe storage. At this stage, the mixture is readily combustible amd sensible precautions are observed to keep it away from any possible ignition sources.


￼
Figure 3 -- This $15 coffee grinder does a superb job of pulverizing the potassium nitrate to a fine texture.

￼
Figure 4 --Propellant "dry" mixer
Casting Fructose-based Propellant

The casting process involves heating of the powdered mixture until it becomes molten, then casting into a mould to produce the propellant grain of the desired shape. The required temperature that the mixture must attain is just above the melting point of Fructose. The potassium nitrate, which has a much higher melting point, remains as solid particles that partly dissolve in the Fructose. The result is a slurry of solid oxidizer particles suspended in liquid Fructose medium.
Heating the mixture is done using a thermostatically controlled electric "deep fryer". A thermostatically controlled skillet may also used for heating KNFR.
It is essential, from a long-term safety consideration, that only a thermostatically controlled heating vessel with no exposed elements be used for heating propellant, the critical intent being that no exposed heating surface is of significantly higher temperature than the melting point of the propellant.
￼

Figure 5 -- Casting setup for KNFR, employing 'tilt-table' for the heating vessel.
(click for larger image)

For Fructose monohydrate-based, the casting temperature should be in the range of 125-135oC., and for anhydrous Fructose-based, it should be in the range of 135-145 oC. To monitor the temperature of the heated slurry, a dial-type candy thermometer, a digital thermometer equipped with a probe sensor, or an infrared thermometer may be used. I've used all three types and have found the infrared thermometer to be the most convenient.
The casting procedure involves first preheating the deep fryer or skillet to the required temperature, and maintaining this temperature +/- 5 degrees. Then, starting with about half the total amount, the powdered mix is added, and stirred often to assist melting. Once this has melted, the remaining powdered mix is added. Stirring helps facilitate melting. The initial colour of the melted slurry is nearly colourless, but begins to turn off-white colour as slight caramelization commences. Eventually, the colour will become that of ivory, as the whole mixture becomes fully molten, and is ready to be cast. A colour darker than this implies that the mixture has been heated too long, as caramelization is a function of time as well as temperature. Once all the powdered mixture has been incorporated into the melt, it is further heated and stirred, to eliminate any lumps that may be present. An additional five to ten minutes of heating will bring the slurry up to the casting temperature. Note that the slurry will not become fluid enough to pour. The consistency will remain quite thick, and must be simultaneously poured and scooped with a spoon or spatula onto the funnel, and allowed to flow into the mould. Immediately after loading, the coring tool is inserted into the mould, making certain it is fully inserted all the way down. This completes the casting operation. The mixture is then allowed to cool and harden.
 Note -- if the colour of the slurry becomes a "peanut butter" or amber colour, this is most likely due to impurities such as anti-caking material in the potassium nitrate. The pH of a saturated aqueous solution of potassium nitrate[1] must be neutral (6.5 - 7.0); impurities tend to make the potassium nitrate strongly alkaline, which leads to this discolourization.

￼
A silicone spatula is ideal for mixing and scooping
The KNFR propellant should be removed from the casting mould and the bore rod extracted as soon as the material has fully solidified and cooled (typically an hour or so). It is not necessary for the cast propellant to "cure" for an extended period of time, as is required with KNSB.

Casting Anhydrous Fructose-based propellant
Certainly the best way to ensure that the cast propellant has minimal residual moisture is to eliminate all the water beforehand. This is done by preparing the propellant mixture using anhydrous Fructose, rather than Fructose monohydrate. Another advantage is that no adjustment to the O/F ratio is required in weighing out the constituents, as is required with the monohydrate.
When casting the propellant, somewhat greater heating is required before melting will commence. In fact, melting initiates at the known melting point of Fructose (not surprisingly). The following temperatures have been measured during the casting process:

Table 3 -- Measured casting temperatures, 65/35 O/F propellant

Anhydrous Fructose-based
Initial melting
145 C.
Fully melted
147 C.
1st sign of caramelization
157 C.

When casting propellant prepared with anhydrous Fructose, it is not necessary to continue heating until caramelization commences, indicated by ivory coloured slurry; it may be poured into the mould as soon as the mixture is fully melted and blended.
Notes on casting Fructose propellant
	•	The fully melted slurry is fairly thick, and further heating will result in only marginally reduced viscocity. 
	•	The slurry should be poured & scooped simultaneously into the mould. A spoon with an insulated handle, or better yet a silicone spatual, works well to direct the slurry into the mould. 
	•	Once all the mixture has been loaded into the mould, a plunger is used to press & compact the mixture and to squeeze out any trapped air. The plunger can be a steel or aluminum rod, of approximately 90% of the diameter of the mould. To prevent the propellant from sticking to the plunger, the plunger is pre-cooled in a freezer for several hours. An alternative plunger design is a hollow metal tube, closed & sealed at one end (see Figure 5). Prior to casting, a couple of ice cubes are dropped into the plunger to chill it.  Compacting the propellant in this manner is very effective in eliminating air bubbles, and the resulting grains typically have a density of 95-97% theoretical. 
	•	To allow for ease of removal of the coring tool, it is lightly coated with silicon grease (plumbers lubricant works very well). The most effective means to remove the coring tool after the propellant has solidified is to clamp the end of the coring tool in a work vise. The grain is then given a forceful rotational twist. The coring tool will then snap free and can be subsequently withdrawn with mininal effort. 
The cast propellant should be in the colour range between ivory (#FFFFF0) and beige (#F5F5DC), as illustrrated in Figure 6 below:

￼  ￼
Figure 6 -- Cast Lambda (left) and Impulser KNFR grains
Using a Casting Tube
A casting tube serves as a sleeve into which molten propellant is poured. I typically use a sleeve made from posterboard, rolled into a cylindrical shape. If the grain is to be uninihibited (burning occurs on the grain outer surface) such as for the A-100M Rocket Motor, the casting tube is coated with grease to allow it to be peeled off after the grain has cured. This is also the case when an inhibiting material (such as polyester soaked fabric) is to be applied to the grain after casting.
Generally, for BATES or other configurations whereby the outer grain surface needs to be inhibited, the casting tube serves an additional function as an inhibitor. In this case, the casting tube intimately bonds to the propellant and becomes a permanent part of the grain. To serve as an effective inhibitor, a paper casting tube must have sufficient thickness. For small motors such as the F70 PVC Rocket Motor 3 or 4 layers of letter paper are sufficient. For larger motors such as the "I-class" Impulser Rocket Motor, two plies of 0.013 inch (0.3mm) posterboard are used. Prior to rolling, the posterboard is made more heat resistant by applying one or two coats of oil-based (not water-based) polyurethane varnish and allowed to fully dry. To form the tube, the posterboard is cut to size, adhesive applied to overlapping region, then rolled firmly around a mandrel of suitable diameter.
As a paper or posterboard casting tube lacks the rigidity to hold its own shape when loaded with propellant, a Support Tube, into which the casting tube is inserted, is used. The Support Tube can be metal or PVC of a suitable size that snuggly holds the casting tube. As is often the case, finding a tube that is exactly the right fit is unlikely. A tube that fits loosely can be made to work by using a spacer, made from posterboard, that wraps around the casting tube with enough layers to provide a good fit within the Support Tube.
Photo of Grain Segments for Impulser Motor with Casting Tube Inhibitor
Curing KNFR under Pressure
It is important that the casting tube, serving as an inhibitor, bonds completely and intimately to the propellant. As hot propellant shrinks when it cools, under certain circumstances the casting tube may partly disbond from the propellant. I have experienced this anomaly when there is too much residual moisture in the propellant, or when the casting tube material lacks the necessary porosity to adhere fully to the propellant. In the first case, the hot residual moisture in the freshly cast propellant migrates to the grain boundaries, when it encounters the casting tube. There it tends to condense, forming a sticky layer. This tends to be more of a problem with KNFR as compared to KNSB which remains pliable after cooling. As the propellant body cools, it shrinks and slightly pulls away from the casting tube, leading to disbonding in some places. In the second case, an inhibitor material that is not sufficiently porous will not allow the propellant to 'grab' hold. Certain cardboard materials have one side that is particulary smooth and shiny, and propellant does not bond well. I always make sure that this smooth surface forms the outside of the casting tube.
Another important consideration when casting a propellant grain is that there be no trapped air bubbles or voids. Lifting then tapping the casting mould repeatedly against a table surface (prior to insertion of the coring rod) after filling with propellant helps dispel air, but this remedy is not infallible.
A very effective solution to avoiding both of these issues is to cure the propellant under pressure. This method eliminates the risk of disbonding, eliminates all trapped air, and results in a consistent propellant grain that has a near-ideal density. I use this method exclusively[1] for. Curing under pressure is achieved by use of a casting mould apparatus that utilizes a compression spring to apply a force to the top surface of the propellant. This force generates a hydrostatic pressure in the body of the propellant, that forces it against its enclosures, consisting of a top cap, a bottom cap and the casting tube (held within the Support Tube). Initially, when the propellant is still hot, only light spring pressure is applied, to squeeze out any trapped air (if overly tightened, hot propellant will ooze out through gaps). After the propellant has largely cooled, full spring pressure is applied and left until the propellant has fully cured.
Based on my experience, the spring should be chosen to deliver a force, when fully compressed, that develops a pressure in the range of 25-40 pounds per square inch (psi) or 170-275 kPa [2]. Using higher pressure could result in difficulty in removing the grain from the mould.
Diagram of Pressure Casting Mould Setup Photo of Pressure Casting Mould Setup for Impulser Motor
  [1] An exception is when using surfactant. Early trials of this method suggest that casting tube bonding is enhanced and trapped air content is minimal.   [2] Recall that pressure equals force divided by area, where area is the cap area acting on the propellant A = 1/4 x 3.14 x (D2 - d2) where D=Cap diameter, d=Cap hole diameter



Water Content and Hygroscopicity
After casting, once the grain has cooled, the propellant surfaces may be sticky due to moisture deposition, depending on the relative humidity. The propellant will dry out typically after 24 hours, if placed within a dessicator. A simple dessicator can be made from a tupperware container with a layer of calcium chloride pellets or flakes spread over the bottom pan. Calcium chloride is readily available as an ice & snow melter or as a drying agent for damp environment.
It would appear that there is a relative humidity (R.H.) threshold that determines whether or not the propellant will be hygroscopic. As with the KNSU propellant, the KNFR propellant is hygroscopic (absorbs moisture from the air). However, the hygroscopic nature of the Fructose propellant is far less severe than sucrose-based. As an ad-hoc experiment, I'd exposed a grain cast from KNFR monohydrate to the open air, and after about two months, it was still bone dry. The R.H. over this duration ranged from 55-60%. At high R.H. levels (around 90%), however, this propellant is indeed very hygroscopic. Interestingly, experimentation has suggested that the resistance to moisture absorption is better if cast as Fructose monohydrate based rather than anhydrous-Fructose based. Perhaps this is a consequence of the lower casting temperature.

Results of hygroscopicity experiment...

Quality Control
After the casting and demoulding operation has been completed, and a visual examination of the resulting grain segment suggests all is well, how can we know for sure whether the grain is acceptable for firing in a rocket motor? Does it contain hidden flaws such as empty voids or air bubbles? How well is the casting tube (inhibitor) bonded to the propellant? Fortunately, there are two checks we can make to assess the grain quality, checks that I always perform:
1) Density Check 2) Tap Test
The first check determines how well packed the cast propellant is. If a grain segment is solidly packed, the segment volume consists entirely of propellant. Often, however, there is a small amount of air, in the form of tiny bubbles, that make up part of the volume. Such air inclusion, if no more than a few percent, has negligible effect on the overall performance of the propellant when fired in a rocket motor.
On the other hand, if there are sizeable bubbles, or great many of therm, or voids caused by trapped air, the result on motor performance can be significant and detrimental. The increased surface area provides for greater burning area than expected, which can lead to overpressurization (or even CATO) of the motor.
Fortunately, a simple and effective check can be made to assess how solid a grain segment is. Presence of air results in a lower density of the propellant compared to the ideal case of solidly packed propellant. A Density Check serves to measure the actual density of the segment and compare it to the ideal case. To perform a Density Check, the grain segment is weighed and the volume measured. Density, which is mass divided by volume, is then calculated. This is compared to the ideal density for KNFR which is 1.879 grams/cubic centimetre (g/cc) or 0.0678 lbs per cubic inch. The ratio of actual to ideal density provides a benchmark of quality, as shown in Table 3.

￼
Table 3 --Propellant density assessment
Volume of a grain can be measured using an accurate ruler, although using calipers is a more accurate means.
Grain core diameter typically does not need to be explicitly measured, as it is the same diameter as the coring rod. If a grain is integral with the casting tube, it is necessary to know both the mass and the thickness of the casting tube, which are subtracted from the measured grain mass and diameter.
For convenience, an MS Excel spreadsheet is available for doing a Density Check: Graindensity.xls
The Tap Test (also known as Coin Tap Test in aerospace industry) only applies to a grain with an integral casting tube as inhibitor. Is is imperative that the inhibitor be intimately bonded to the propellant to be effective, there must be no disbonding or gap. Such disbonding could allow hot combustion gases to seep in between the inhibitor and the propellant body, increasing the burning area of the propellant. The Tap Test assesses this bond by indicating areas of disbonding.
The test is performed by taking a coin (larger coin works better) and gently tapping the inhibitor at points all around the grain segment, and noting the sound that the tapping makes. The sound (and feel) should be a solid tap as opposed to a "dull" tap. The tap sound is, of course, difficult to explain in words, it actually takes experience to recognize what is a good tap sound and what is a bad tap sound. I have found that the best technique is to listen to the relative tap sounds at the various tapping points. Each tap should sound identical. Any locations where the tap sound is distinctly different (usually more dull, like tapping on hard rubber versus tapping on hard plastic, for example) signals a possible disbonding. If this occurs only at a single location, its generally not a problem. I have found, for example, that at the seam of a rolled casting tube, a different tap sound is heard. I consider this normal and not a problem.
What we particularly need to be on the lookout for is a different tap response between grains segments of the same batch. If one of the grain segments of a batch sounds distinctly different, and less solid, that grain's inhibitor may have a flawed bond. When I encounter this, I reject the grain segment and do an examination. The inhibitor is slit lengthwise and carefully peeled away, examining the bond. A flawed bond is usually apparent, as it is easy to peel and there is little or no propellant residue on the inhibitor surface.
I have, on occasion, noticed that a grain segment may fail a tap test due to residual moisture in the bondline. Placing the segment in a dessicator for a few days often results in a "pass" when the test is redone. On a final note, for grains that are cured under pressure, failing a Tap Test is very rare. Out of perhaps two hundred grain segments that I have produced using this method, only a few have failed a Tap Test due to flawed inhibitor bonding.

Theoretical Performance
The theoretical performance of the KNFR propellant is essentially the same as that of the KNSU and KNSB propellants. For example, the specific impulse (65/35 O/F) is less than 1% lower than KNSU, the combustion temperature is nearly identical, and the products of combustion are very similar, including the mass fraction of particles in the exhaust. The ideal density of the cast propellant is also nearly identical (1.879 compared to 1.888 g./cu.cm.). Details are given in the KN-Fructose Chemistry & Performance Characteristics web page.

Safety

Suitable protective gear must be worn during the casting operation. These include leather gloves, flame-proof jacket, and eye and face shield. Other sensible precautions should also be taken, such as having a fire extinguisher nearby (although it may not extinguish burning propellant, anything else that catches on fire can be extinquished) and keeping anything at all flammable away from the casting operation. I always had a large pail of water nearby. Water can extinguish burning propellant by means of heat absorption and it helps prevent any unburnt propellant from igniting.

Discard any left-over, unused or unsuitable propellant. Do not attempt to reheat solidified propellant, as it will not melt in a safe, even manner and hot spots may develop. Discard propellant by dissolving in hot water. Hot water also works extremely well to clean the casting equipment and utenzils. The resulting solution is not harmful to persons or to the environment.

Before beginning each propellant casting session, prepare yourself. Imagine that accidental ignition will occur, what safeguards have you in place, and what will your immediate actions be? This is something I always do.

In my nearly 50 years of rocketry propellant making, I never had an accident that resulted in injury. Mishaps, and the unexpected, certainly occurred, but because I always took sensible precautionary measures, and considered safety as the number one priority, no harm resulted.

Burn rate
The burn rate of a propellant is a key parameter used in rocket motor design. This is explained in detail on another web page (Details). Briefly, burn rate will vary dependant upon pressure and temperature. The effect of pressure is far more pronounced, and more important for motor design. A preliminary experimental investigation was conducted to determine the effect of pressure upon the burn rate by utilizing a Strand Burner apparatus. Details of this investigation are presented on another web page, but results are summarized in Figure 8. Four data points were obtained from the limited testing: pressures were ambient, 518 psig (3.57MPa), 799 psig (5.51MPa) and 1113 psig (7.67MPa). Interestingly, KNFR was found to be exhibit a burn rate versus pressure behaviour essentially the same as for KNDX (within experimental erro). A comparison between KNFR and KNDX is given in Figure 8. The effect of temperature upon burn rate of KNFR has not yet been conducted.
￼
Figure 8 - Experimental results of the effect of pressure on burn rate

￼
Figure 8 - Experimental results of the effect of pressure on burn rate
The fact that KNFR exhibits the same burn rate behaviour as KNDX is fortuitous. This allows for KNFR motors to be designed using the same parameters as KNDX (for example, when using SRM_2014.xls). The Motor Design Chart for KNDX propellant can be used for KNFR propellant. The similarity of burn rate and performance was verified by static testing of the A-100M rocket motor. Two similar propellant grains were prepared, one of KNFR and the other KNDX. The two motors were fired and the thrust and chamber pressure measured. The results, shown in Figure 9, confirm the essentially identical maximum thrust and pressure and similarly shaped curves.

￼ ￼
Figure 9 - Experimental results of static test firings


Assessment
Over the past decade and a half, I have developed and successfully fired a number of successful motors which utilize KNFR propellant, including:
	•	Impulser motor ("I" class)
	•	Kappa motor ("K" class)
	•	Juno motor ("J" class)
	•	A-100M motor ("G" class)
	•	B-200 motor ("H" class) Designated B-200DX, this motor has been fired a number of times with KNFR propellant
The delivered performance of the KNFR propellant is essentially identical to that of the KNSU and better than that of the KNSB propellant. Operating in the Kappa motor, the propellant was found to deliver a respectable specific impulse of 137 seconds. More typically, delivered performance is in the 130-133 second range.
The burn rate of this propellant (at elevated pressure) was found to be somewhat lower than sucrose-based propellant. This allows for the design of a rocket motor with a greater burn time. One drawback of KNFR propellant is the "plateau" burn rate behaviour, which tends to complicate the design process to some degree. However, recent experimentation has shown that the "plateau" behaviour can be suppressed by doping the formulation with charcoal pigment. Iron oxide provides a similar effect, and results in a greater burn rate.
The KNFR propellant has a considerable advantage over the sucrose-based propellant with regard to ease of casting. The temperature of the melted mixture is significantly lower, which results in an improved safety margin with regard to overheating. Lower casting temperature also leads to the noteworthy advantage of less rapid "freeze-up" of the melted mixture, which results in a better cast product with fewer voids or air bubbles. Decomposition (caramelization) of the propellant due to heating is minimal, and pot life of the melted slurry is superior to that of KNSU (although less than that of KNSB).
The mechanical properties of cast Fructose-based propellant are very similar to both KNSU and KNSBpropellants, that is, rigid and brittle, whether prepared using monohydrate or anhydrous form of Fructose. However, the strength of Fructose-based propellant (and of the KNSU & KNSB) is appreciable, and does not appear to pose any practical limitations on grain size or geometry.
The hygroscopic nature of this propellant appears to be less problematic than that of KNSU or KNSB propellants, particularly if cast in the monohydrate form. As well, the ambient relative humidity (R.H.) seems to play a significant role. It would appear that there is a R.H. threshold that determines whether or not the propellant is hygroscopic. It has been determined by experience that if the R.H. is maintained less than approximately 60%, the propellant will remain completely dry to the touch when exposed to the open air.

Download complete report of the Fructose heating experiments  Investigation into use of Fructose Monohydrate as a Rocket Fuel/Binder
Download complete report of the burn rate experiments  Measurement of Burn rate versus Pressure for KNFR & KN-Sorbitol

￼
Last updated June 26, 2018
Return to Top of Page
Back to Home Page

