
Synthesis Method-4A
The aim of Method 4A is to produce potassium nitrate of reasonable purity, suitable for sugar propellants and other potassium nitrate based propellants, with minimal processing. Typical yield is around 50% of theoretical.
The following steps show how to convert one kilogram of Calcium-Ammonium Nitrate Decahydrate which I will abbreviate as CAND. The corresponding amount of KCl required is 760 grams. Net yield is approximately 500 grams of reasonably pure potassium nitrate:
	1	Prepare a saturated solution of potassium chloride (KCl) and water (tap water is fine). At 20 degrees Celsius, the solubility of KCl is 34.2 grams per 100 grams of water. Therefore, for each kilogram of KCl, 3 kg of water is required. As such, dissolve 760 grams of KCl in 2.3 kg tap water.If the KCL is water softener salt, it comes in the form of sizeable chunks. The simplest way to dissolve these chunks of KCl is to prepare the solution a week ahead of time. Vigorously stir the solution two or three times each day, and after a week the KCl will have fully dissolved. Alternatively, the KCl may be dissolved in hot water. At 80 degrees Celsius, the solubility of KCl is 51.3 grams per 100 grams of water. At 100 degrees Celsius, the solubility of KCl is 56.3 grams per 100 grams of water, so not much is gained by heating the water to boiling. For safety, it is recommended to heat the solution no higher than 80 degrees Celsius. 
	2	Prepare a saturated solution of CAND. At 20 degrees Celsius, the solubility of CAND is 178 grams per 100 grams of water. Therefore, for a kilogram of CAND, 560 grams of water is required. As such, dissolve 1 kg of CAND in 560 grams warm tap water. The CAND will fully dissolve within a day if stirred several times thoughout the day. 
	3	Combine the two saturated solutions into a single container and stir well. When pouring the KCl solution, use a strainer to catch any undissolved pieces of KCl. When fully combined, some precipitate may be seen at this point, however, owing to the high solubility of the resulting products at room temperature, little precipitated product may be present. Place the container of combined solution in a freezer (or place outdoors if winter-time in a northern climate). Cool down to -10 (+/- 2) degrees Celsius. If cooled to a lower temperature inadvertently, allow the solution to warm up to -10 degrees C. At this point, a large mass of crystals of potassium nitrate will have formed. 
	4	Siphon off the supernatant liquid or pour through a strainer to catch the crystals. Place the harvested crystals back into the freezer to keep cold while performing the next step. 
	5	Prepare an ice-bath of ice cubes and one litre of water. Allow the water to chill to nearly zero degress Celsius (approximately 1/2 hour). Strain out the ice cubes leaving only the ice water. 
	6	Pour the ice-water into the container containing the crystals. Wash the crystals with half the ice-water. Pour out the wash water using a fine strainer to catch the mass of crystals. 
	7	Repeat the washing and straining of the crystals using the remaining ice-water. 
	8	The next step is to partly dry the potassium nitrate crystals. Cut out a piece of fine nylon or polyester fabric approximately 40cm x 40cm. Place the fabric on several sheets of newspaper or paper towelling. Spread the damp crystals over the fabric piece. The absorbent paper will soak up residual moisture in the crystals. Place in a suitable (warm) location to dry. Change the paper layers several times over the next few hours. This is performed by lifting the fabric piece at the four corners. 
	9	The product will contain some calcium chloride. A trace amount will not affect performance of the propellant. However, a greater amount of calcium chloride contaminent is not desirable as the performance is affected. In particular, burn rate of propellant made with the product may be slowed to an undesirable extent. As well, calcium chloride is hygroscopic which can be problematic when milling the product (it will tend to cake together).  Recrystallization To purify the product, recrystallization is done next. The product will be dissolved in hot water then cooled down to a low temperature to recrystallize. The harvested crystals are then washed and fully dried. 
	10	The solubility of potassium nitrate is 200 grams per 100 grams of water at 90oC. The harvested product will weigh approximately 600 grams. As such, dissolve the product in 300 grams water heated to 90oC. 
	11	Carefully pour the hot solution into a suitable container to cool. Allow to cool to room temperature. Stir occasionally to break up the crystals that form. 
	12	Place the container into a freezer (or place outdoors if winter-time in a northern climate). Cool down to -10 (+/- 2) degrees Celsius. Stir the solution every half hour or so to prevent large crystals from forming (washing is done more expediently with smaller crystals). 
	13	Repeat steps 4-8. Allow the product to fully dry in a warm, dry location. A fan gently blowing over the crystals greatly speeds up the drying process. 
